---
title: Dark Matter Detection

---

Dark matter is a mysterious name for something we still have not a single direct
detection. It's actually a very fitting description, because we can't see it...
and thus, it's quite literally dark in the physical sense! 

The first thought many people have when they hear about dark matter, is: how can
we even know that it exists? I usually counter this with another question: how
can we know that wind exists? We can make observations of things which might be
especially likely to be affected by it. Leaves on tree branches for example,
sway in the wind.  Similarly, we see stars at the outskirts of galaxies move
seemingly faster than expected from the visible matter only. The luminous matter
in galaxies would also have to be 100 times more massive to explain a phenomenon
called "gravitational lensing", and so on. We simply know that the structures of
the Universe just could not function on a huge cosmological scale without the
gravity of dark matter.

However, a direct detection turns out to be extremely difficult, because with
the exception of gravity, dark matter seems to be immune to any other kind of
interaction. Nevertheless, it is hypothesized that an interaction through the
electro-weak force might be possible, although extremely rare. One of the
proposed experimental detection methods use something surprisingly simple
bubbles!

Bubble formation in liquid happens when the liquid is superheated (or
stretched). Bubble formation is actually important to a wide range of fields,
the quark-gluon plasma to hadron gas-phase change in the early universe,
targeted drug delivery, volcano fountaining, cavitation corrosion of
water-exposed materials, stimulating accelerated healing of bone fractures, and
even and flavor infusion of plant matter into alcohol in the kitchen.

The underlying physics is complicated and badly understood: a non-equilibrium
multi-body system, with analytical models living within the intersection of
molecular dynamics, fluid dynamics and thermodynamics. However, viscosity,
surface tension, and a few other thermo-physical properties may be all we need
to describe the process of bubble formation and growth. We perform molecular
dynamics simulations of these kinds of systems to test these models, and design
better ones. This is a necessary first step in order to understand how dark
matter would induce bubble nucleation and a detectable signal in a detector.

Further details can be found in my publication: [Denzel, Diemand & Angélil (2016)](https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.93.013301)

Or a related work which continues with the our data
[](/assets/files/bubble.tar.gz) here: [Kozynets, Fallows & Krauss
(2019)](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.052001)


Here is a video demonstrating how a bubble nucleation track induced by a dark matter candidate could look like:

<iframe width="100%" height="500px" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rgGgkW7SySM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>