---
title: Star Formation

---

When molecular hydrogen assembles into giant over-dense clouds at roughly 10
Kelvin, it collapses until it starts to shine.  This process and the
circumstances around the formation of such proto-stars is relatively poorly
understood. Stars are incredibly complex and at the same time arguably the most
studied astronomical objects.  This is partially due to the fact that we have
one right in our neighborhood, partially because almost all the light we see in
the Universe comes from them either directly or indirectly through thermal
emission from the surrounding gas and dust heated by the stars.

Computational simulations are essential in the study of the formation of stars.
Without any means of performing experiments or observations, they allow one to
test theoretical models of star formation from first principles.

I present analytical models and numerical simulations with the purpose of
exploring the influence of radiation onto star formation. Special focus is laid
on the interaction of infrared radiation with molecular clouds, the birth place
of stars. It has been found that infrared radiation has a great effect on the
gas in the near vicinity where the proto-stars formed. The radiation transfers
energy to the gas, which causes it to heat and consequently to fragment.
Moreover, the radiation exerts a moderate force on the gas around it. This
effect is not able to fully stop its gravitational collapse, but seems to delay
the process. With more distance from the proto-star the radiationâ€™s influence
weakens, which suggests that on larger scales other kinds of radiation or
feedback mechanisms might play a dominating role.

I performed numerous simulations with RAMSES, a general-purpose hydrodynamical
simulator which was initially designed by Romain Teyssier to study the
cosmological evolution of baryonic and dark matter under self-gravity in a
large-scale context. Here is an example how a simulation of such a molecular
cloud could look like:

<iframe width="100%" height="500" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pl6kWlW-1y8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="100%" height="500" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ZgkAqvq_Fl8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>