---
layout: post
body: blog
type: post
tab_title: 005 | Blog | Dreamworld
title: "About git and GitHub"
date: 2018-06-14 22:58:00 GMT+1
thumbnail: /assets/blog-assets/005-about-git/images/thumb.jpg
number: 005
---

This post is a summary of a talk I was recently asked to give in front of my fellow PhD students.
It basically was a git tutorial with a few extension from GitHub.
I gave a live demo in which I demonstrated how I use git in my all-day work.
Git really is a something worth knowing, and easy to learn (even if it sometimes doesn't seem like it).
It takes some time to pick it up, but the advantages outweigh the expenditure of time hundredfold, trust me!

<!--more-->

## What is git?
* created by Linus Torvald (in 2005)
* the origin of the name "git" depends on your mood:
  * random three-letter combination that is pronounceable and close to "get" (if you're impartial)
  * it's actually a word and means:
    * stupid
    * contemptible and despicable
    * simple
  * "global information tracker" (if you're in a good mood)
  * "goddamn idiotic truckload of sh*t" (if your mood is bad)
* version control system
  * manage source code
  * history of changes
  * coordinate work with multiple collaborators
* for me: combined with GitHub
  * backup
  * publish project's code
  * collaborations

### What is GitHub?

[GitHub](https://github.com/) is a web-based filehosting service using git

* offers all of git's functionality
* adds some own features
* provides a "GUI"-like interface (for _terminal-shy individuals_)
* currently hosting 28 million open-source repositories (57 million in total)

## How to install?

* Linux: (if it doesn't come with the system already preinstalled)
  * apt-get/yum package manager
  * if you're brave enough: install from source: [https://github.com/git/git](https://github.com/git/git)
* MacOS: preinstalled version is ancient!!!
  * homebrew, macports, etc.
  * get the installer from  [https://git-scm.com/downloads](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
* Windows: 
  * get the installer from  [https://git-scm.com/downloads](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
  * [Install it like this...](/assets/blog-assets/005-about-git/movies/win-gitinstall.webm)


## Five most important commands you should remember

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git init
git add
git status
git commit -m <span style="color: #00875F;">"Cookies are awesome"</span>
git push  <span style="color: #878787;"># </span><span style="color: #878787;">and git pull</span>
</pre>
</div>

If you don't know/remember what those are try typing `man gittutorial` or `man giteveryday` in your terminal!


## Gotta-have-dot(files)

* [`.gitconfig`](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phdenzel/dotfiles/master/.gitconfig)
* [`.gitignore`](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phdenzel/dotfiles/master/.gitignore)


## Example

To understand what git is and why you should use it, it's best to just give it a try.
So open a terminal window and let's go!
  
Initialize a git repository wit
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
mkdir gitdemo &amp;&amp; <span style="color: #5FD7FF;">cd</span> gitdemo
git init
</pre>
</div>

You'll (probably not) notice that a new directory `.git` appeared!
Type `ls -a` to check...

Let's create a file to start our new project
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
touch index.html
</pre>
</div>

Write something in it to make it a more realistic test!
For example:
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
cat &lt;&lt;EOF &gt; index.html
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">&lt;html&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">  &lt;head&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">    &lt;title&gt;My awesome baking recipes&lt;/title&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">  &lt;/head&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">  &lt;body&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">    &lt;ul class="cookies"&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;flour&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;eggs&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;butter&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;sugar&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;salt&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;baking soda&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">      &lt;li&gt;chocolate&lt;/li&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">    &lt;/ul&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">  &lt;/body&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">&lt;/html&gt;</span>
<span style="color: #ffa54f;">EOF</span>
</pre>
</div>

Once we finished our work on the file, let's check the status of our repository...
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git status
</pre>
</div>

Git will respond with
<pre class="src-bash">
On branch master
No commits yet
Untracked files:
  (use "git add &lt;file&gt;..." to include in what will be committed)
  index.html
  nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
</pre>

It told us that it currently doesn't track changes in our new file `index.html`.
It will also propose what to do next with commands in `("")`.
So, let's add `index.html` to our git structure with

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git add index.html
</pre>
</div>

If multiple files were created and you'd want to add all of them at once, simply type `git add .`.
  
Now the status says:
<pre class="src-bash">
On branch master
No commits yet
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached &lt;file&gt;..." to unstage)
        new file:   index.html
</pre>

Now the file is recognized by git.
Since we're happy with our file, let's commit its contents with

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git commit -m <span style="color: #00875F;">"Cookies are awesome"</span>
</pre>
</div>

Now the status shows

<pre class="src-bash">
On branch master
nothing to commit, working tree clean
</pre>

From now on, everytime you change `index.html`, git will recognize those changes and compare to the previously logged (i.e. committed) version.
To check, change the file contents of `index.html` somehow and look at the difference with

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
sed -i <span style="color: #00875F;">'16i\      &lt;li&gt;water&lt;/li&gt;'</span> index.html
git diff index.html
</pre>
</div>

To undo those changes simply type
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git checkout -- index.html
</pre>
</div>


Now that we have tried the recipe, eaten the cookies, and are confident that we don't want to change it, we're finally ready to upload our repository.
To do that we need to create a repository on GitHub.
This can be done manually (by signing in to GitHub, clicking on the "New repository" button, and following further instructions from GitHub).
However, we're "browser-lazy", so we'll use GitHub's API to do the same from the terminal.
Note: if you want to use the following two commands, sign up for an account at GitHub, replace `phdenzel` with your own GitHub username and `gitdemo` with your repository's name.
  
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
curl -u phdenzel https://api.github.com/user/repos -d <span style="color: #00875F;">"{\"name\":\"gitdemo\"}"</span>
</pre>
</div>

Check on GitHub if the repo was created.
If so, you might notice that it is still empty.
To add a _remote_, an off-site copy of the same repository with which to sync up, go back to the terminal and type:
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git remote add origin git@github.com:phdenzel/gitdemo.git
git remote -v
</pre>
</div>
  
To sync up with your local repository simply type
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git push -u origin master
</pre>
</div>

And voila! Your file was uploaded to GitHub.
You're now able to work on the repository, expand it, etc.
After you worked on it, don't forget to add+commit your changes with `git commit -a -m "Pizza recipe"` and push the commits to GitHub with `git push`.


### Undo previous commit

It often happens that you pushed something accidentally and want to revert to the previous commit.
This can be achieved with
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git reset HEAD^ --hard
git push -f
</pre>
</div>

### Merge conflicts

Sometimes, pulls and pushes give rise to _merge conflicts_, especially if more than one person works on the same file.
It happens when two lines have been changed to something else than what is expected from the remote.
Unfortunately, this isn't automatically solved by git, so you have to fix each conflict by hand.
Git will mark the lines with `<<<<<<< HEAD`, `>>>>>>> BRANCH-NAME`, and divide them with `=======`.
Just decide which version you like better and delete the rest, add+commit, and then push.


### Checkpoint branching

Another thing I find useful, is what I like to call _checkpoint branching_.
Sometimes your project is in perfect shape, and you don't want to mess it up by changing something.
The solution is to move to a different _branch_ and copy everything over.

Look at all current branches with
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git branch -a
</pre>
</div>

Now check that you are on the `master` branch, branch off to a new one, and 

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git checkout master
git branch dev
</pre>
</div>

Perform your experiment on the `dev` branch, where you don't hurt the `master` branch.
Then add+commit, and push the entire branch to the remote

<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git add .
git commit -a -m <span style="color: #00875F;">"Highly experimental"</span>
git push -u origin dev
</pre>
</div>

Once you're finished and want to move everything to `master`, merge them with
<div class="src-bash">
<pre class="src src-bash">
git checkout master
git pull origin dev
git push origin master
</pre>
</div>
